[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> So Tracy, I get why like a city like New
York City, it's housing is really
expensive. It's really difficult to
build. I mean, there's not a lot of
space, right, in New York City. Like, I
don't really blame New York City for not
building a lot of new housing. Like,
where would you put it exactly?
>> Right. Manhattan is an island. Seems
somewhat limited. Plus, it has a giant
park taking up a good chunk of it. So,
there's that.
>> And it seems nimbies are keeping it so
that we can't develop on Central Park.
But, yeah, like I sort of get why
housing is really strained in New York
City. I don't blame anyone really for
it. But it always seems like in the more
rural locations, especially where
there's not a lot of population growth.
It should be really easy to, you know,
just build more houses or, you know, use
the houses that people left when they
moved. And yet, our impression is from
past trips, etc., that there's a lot of
strain on rural housing as well.
>> That's right. So, we've done a few field
trips to places like North Carolina, and
we learned that even in an area that
certainly is not as densely populated as
Manhattan, there are housing issues. And
now we are up here in Alaska, which, you
know, if there's one thing I know about
Alaska, it's that it is big.
>> It's big. Yeah.
>> Like twice the size of Texas. Is that
the stat that people
>> Something like that. It's incredible.
Something like that. There's got to be
some empty space to build houses,
>> you would think, right? And yet we're up
here and one of the things that people
keep talking about over and over again
is this idea of housing strains within
Alaska in Anchorage too, which is where
we are right now.
>> Yeah, totally. And we have heard that
multiple times. And so whatever the
issue is that sort of
>> the story that we tell about Manhattan,
there must be something more to it
because it's not just a matter of no
space because even places that are
swimming in space have strains. And so I
want to understand what that is. We've
been up in Alaska. Listeners will
remember our episode we did with Mary
Daly and maybe some other ones that came
out by the time this episode is coming
out, but there's no uh there's no way to
understand a state without understanding
its housing economy.
>> Absolutely not. And also just because
it's Alaska, the other thing I'm really
interested in, and I think you might be
interested in it, too, as a relatively
new homeowner is just the idea of
maintenance on a house in Alaska. It
must be insane, right? Like imagine how
often you're replacing a roof in a place
like that gets like you know feet and
feet and feet of snowfall every year.
>> No, totally. All right. Well, we do in
fact have the perfect guests. We are at
the Alaska Housing Finance Corporation.
We are going to be speaking with Jimmy
Or. He is the director of research and
rural development as well as Daniel
Delfino, director of planning and
program development. So, uh Jimmy and
Daniel, thank you so much for uh coming
on OddLots.
>> Oh, thank you. This is Daniel. It's nice
to be here. We appreciate the invitation
to chat with your highly sophisticated
group.
>> This is Jimmy. Happy to be here.
>> Well, thank you both for having us at
your office. What do you just for
listeners tell us what do you do and
what is the Alaska Housing Finance
Corporation?
>> Alaska and Finance Corporation. This is
Jimmy. We are an organization that
addresses safe quality affordable
housing in Alaska. That's that's our
mission. In the early 90s, the state of
Alaska, they took the different housing
departments and the housing finance
agency and they put them under one roof.
So in many other states you can have a
housing department maybe in the
department of commerce or under revenue
or under some other function of the
state where we get to walk across the
hall and talk to our counterparts in the
mortgage department or the finance
department public housing division. So,
we're an organization that is all things
housing in the state of Alaska, and
that's really helped with collaboration
and getting programs and services out
the door.
>> So, Joe and I tried to do this in the
intro a little bit, but why don't you
contextualize for us what are the actual
housing issues in the state of Alaska?
How would you describe some of the
problems that you're trying to solve?
>> So, there are a lot
you said earlier, go into the details.
The housing issues used to be a lot
simpler uh when I started in 2008. It's
kind of like the algebra problems that
evolve the more math you take.
>> You solve for C and you're only dealing
with one unknown variable and you're
able to triangulate that and solve it
pretty simply. And then it's like, okay,
now you have two unknown variables and
you use the substitution rule. And now
you get up to three or four unknown
variables and all of a sudden you have
to start using linear equations. And
it's just gets to this level of
complexity where you need a computer.
And that's kind of what we're dealing
with in terms of the the issues as they
they've kind of emerged over the state.
We have some places that are dealing
with population drain. We have some
places that are dealing with an aging
contracting base where the people are
retiring and there's no new people
coming up behind them. We have other
communities that are struggling with the
cost of housing development. I mean, you
mentioned the cost of housing in the
intro. It's um there are a lot of things
that drive housing costs and housing
challenges. I'm guessing we'll get into
here, but then you have the housing
stock itself. When I started, it used to
be you had apartments, you had houses,
and you had hotels. Now the three things
are effectively linked thanks to the
emergence of vacation rentals in a lot
of our communities where the hospitality
industry is now inextricably linked to
the the housing industry because you
have inventory that is taking a
multi-purpose nature uh throughout the
year. So there are a lot of things
moving all at once and the old days of
being able to focus on one or two issues
and try and understand how it's
affecting the housing market at large,
those are largely gone and we're we're
left in this layer of complexity that's
very difficult to conceptualize and even
harder to communicate to other people
that don't live and breathe this stuff.
And adding to that, Daniel, I just want
to make sure folks understand the
vastness of the state of Alaska. Like
you talked about there in the
introduction, imagine a state where you
can get on a plane and fly 3 hours west
and still be in Alaska. Okay, so there's
so much in this state that is going to
be varied because of the location and
the community. And you have communities
in rural Alaska that have several dozen
people in them and they still need
housing and services and the cost to
make sure that they have safe quality
affordable housing is going to be
extreme. So they have to ensure that the
housing that they're building is
appropriate for that space and climate.
Now, if you were going to start in
Southeast Alaska and you wanted to
travel to the North Slope, you're going
to leave a wet rainforest,
marine climate, and you're going to head
to the North Slope, which is up in
Ukavic area, and you're going to see
extreme temperature changes from 50
below zero to, you know, to 50 60°
Fahrenheit above of freezing, you know,
so it's it's quite a state and when
you're thinking of housing in that
space, it's not a magic silver bullet.
>> One of the things that you'll find as
you go on this journey from Southeast
Alaska up to Ukyavic is if you flip a
coin, probably about half of the
merchants that you find online that you
may take for granted on Amazon won't
ship to you in Alaska. So when you
talked about some of the housing
challenges, people don't all do business
in Alaska, and those that do tend to
charge us gouging prices to get things
up here. Jimmy mentioned uh flying three
hours to western Alaska to get to one of
the communities. We did that last year
for a board meeting. And when you get to
that place, when you go down the runway,
you see a plane off to the side of the
runway. And it's a plane that broke down
that just stayed there. There are things
in that harbor that have rusted out
because they don't they don't come out
and pick them up. I mean, there are
certain things that people take for
granted like uh shipping services that
you're going to be able to get new parts
in. and you're going to be able to take
things away that are dilapitated in your
community that aren't a reality for a
lot of the people that we work with in
this state. A lot of our our neighbors,
especially in the places off the road
system, which is the majority of our
communities, don't have a lot of the
things that most people take for
granted.
>> So, never having been there, I can only
imagine the sort of weirdness and
difficulties of trying to, you know,
commerce and housing, etc. in some of
these extreme far-flung locations. Let's
just start though with like the
relatively major urban centers. You
know, we're in Anchorage right now, the
biggest city in the state. Like what's
happened on the affordability front here
and what's happened on the construction
front here over the last several years?
>> Sure. So, I'll take a shot at this one.
On affordability,
we've seen a a bifurcation in the
market.
The interest rates a couple of years ago
were down in the twos for people that
wanted to refinance and the homeowner
market was going gang busters and the
prices when interest rates were low
reflected that there was a huge price
acceleration in the cost of homes. Uh
fast forward to now instead of a 2%
interest rate I think our rate that we
published for first-time home buyers on
our website checked it this morning at
6.2%.
So a couple of years ago things were
much cheaper. Same thing for renters
cheaper for renters. It's just the
growth rates. When I'm talking about the
lines going up at different angles,
homeowners in Anchorage, the cost has
gone up by over 60% in the last couple
of years versus close to 30% for
renters. So, both have it bad. It's just
one one has a much steeper curve. So
what we're seeing is a lot of folks
could not afford to buy their own home
again at today's interest rates and
that's affecting their willingness to
sell them because they can't afford to
buy something new in another community
or even within the same community at the
interest rates that they charge. So you
have folks that are maybe stuck or uh
less mobile in homes that are really
expensive now. You have renters that
don't have people freeing up a home
ownership sock. So it's getting a little
bit more congested there and a lot of
things are moving in terms of the
development, the inflation chaos that we
were seeing in the construction industry
where no one would do guaranteed maximum
price contract anymore and it was all
time of materials. Some of that
craziness in terms of the escalations
that we were seeing year-over-year like
20 30%. That seems to have died down.
It's still expensive, don't get me
wrong, but that's moderated a little
bit. What hasn't changed is the
availability of land. I mean, you look
around and you see, "Wow, you're huge."
You see, we brag all the time, we're
twice as big as Texas. Why can't you
build housing everywhere? Well, the land
here isn't the easiest to build on.
Like, you can look at a hill and it will
be considered a federal wetland because
there will be a specific type of plant
that's on the side of the hill or the
hill is owned by the federal government
or some other entity. So, what you see
versus what's available to develop,
there can be a disconnect in some
communities. And Anchorage is one of our
older communities, so it's been built
out with a lot of the easy and the good
land taken first. There are other places
to build outside of Anchorage, and we do
see that sprawling a little bit more
outside of the main community, but for
the communities that have been
developing for 20 or 30 years, they're
starting to reach the more mature stage
where they're running into the harder
things to develop, uh, given what's
left.
>> Yeah. So what I hear you saying, Daniel,
is that in many ways Anchorage is
somewhat similar to other larger
communities throughout the country where
they're facing cost of construction,
labor shortages,
>> the lock in effect.
>> Yeah. But I'd still prefer to live here.
[Music]
Okay, one thing that I know is unusual
about Alaska and Anchorage specifically
is that you have a large turnover of the
population, right? You have a lot of
people who are leaving every year and
you have a lot of people who are coming
in and on the whole you have seen I
think a slight maybe not for Anchorage
per se you'll have to correct me but
there's been an overall population
decline in the state for sure. How does
that turnover in the population and the
idea that you know for the most part you
have seen a decline in total numbers how
does that feed into the housing
situation?
>> Not the way that you might think.
>> Okay. So in 2010, shortly after I
started, we were um talking about a
housing plan here in Anchorage. And
there were projections that Anchorage
was going to grow as far as the I could
see. We were going to have all these
people coming in. 6 years later, the
population peaked and then it started
falling. So I was like, okay, we peaked
in 2016 and then we started going down
to a base around 2020, 2021, and then we
started coming back up. So, we have
about 2,000 more people now uh in the
last recorded population year than we
did in 2016.
Well, the vacancies have gone up and
it's when we see that people leave, you
would expect, okay, the vacancy rate
should go up, right?
>> Yeah.
>> That's not happening. So, it's like some
of the things when I talked earlier
about you used to have one variable or
two variables explaining things and now
we have a sort of multi-purpose
inventory. Why is that? Yeah, this to me
a huge question.
>> Are people changing their living
arrangements? Do we have housing stock?
Because I mean, if you go from the
supply and demand, if you reduce the
supply, you can you can get back to a
tighter vacancy rate by doing that even
if the demand is falling. I don't know
if that's happening. We're trying to
track the vacation rental data as best
we can. We go through a company, I don't
want to name a company in case that gets
me into some commercial issue here, but
we get proprietary reports where we
track the growth in vacation rental
listings across the state. and we see
that those have gone up uh they've
almost doubled uh since I want to say
2017 2018 when we started tracking them.
Is that just the data set being
completed or is that legitimate growth?
I mean these are questions that we're
asking because these are new issues. If
it's legitimate growth and the vacation
rental stock did actually double and now
we're looking at 7,000 units that have
come online across the state in the last
couple of years. That's a big number. If
that's just counting what the data set
wasn't recording in the earlier years,
then I don't know. So, we're seeing a
lot of these things that offer
explanations, but there's still such new
issues in the data and in housing in
general that we're really reluctant to
come out forward and say
deterministically, yes, it's this, yes,
it's that. But we do see things that
don't make sense because usually housing
is a function of people. If you have
less people, you should probably need
less housing. And that's not what we're
seeing in the data.
>> And so, Joe, it's unironically our fault
as some of the visitors coming to
Anchorage.
>> We stay in a hotel, though.
>> Yeah. Okay. But we might go to an Airbnb
later this weekend. So
>> that's true.
>> I'm sorry. It was 739 uh for the state
in a couple years ago and now we're at
741.
>> Yeah. So
>> So 2,000 more people.
>> I I came to Alaska in the late 90s and I
I feel that that was the number back
then. It just it just hasn't really
changed that much. And so to your point,
Tracy, where you have people moving to
the state, they work for a period of
time and then and then they move out.
you know, they they've kind of come,
they've experienced the wildness of
Alaska and then they're moving on to
doing different things.
>> Yeah. And we used to be a counteryclical
state in that uh people would come up
here when there was a downturn in the
lower 48 as we refer to the rest of the
country.
>> We've probably heard the term lower 48
more in the last three or four days than
I had.
>> It's not a pjorative. It's just a
geographical distinction.
>> Forget that. That's where we are.
Anyway, keep going.
>> No one calls Alaska the like upper one
though.
>> The upper one. The 49th state.
>> That would kind of sound elitist. Yeah.
>> Okay. So, my other question in terms of
housing stock in a place like Anchorage
was just
>> how much is lost through like sheer
attrition I guess and like
>> depreciation
>> depreciation. And I could kind of I
could see arguing this both ways. So, on
the one hand, because construction costs
are so high here, if you have a house,
even if it's aging and falling apart,
you probably want to hold on to it and
try to fix it up and keep it. But on the
other hand, just looking at the
environment here, just looking at the
weather, you must have rapidly, rapidly
depreciating housing stock.
>> That's one of the biggest challenges
that Anchorage housing faces is its
resilience. Most of the housing in
Anchorage was built during the 70s and
80s when Alaska, you may have heard of
this thing called the Alaska pipeline,
heard of it. Yeah. And a lot of the
housing was thrown up with 2x4
construction based on construction
techniques and practices that were
appropriate for somewhere down south.
How's that for not saying lower 48?
>> And and what that means is
>> I like we're in the southern part of the
United States here when we when we go
back to New York.
>> The the housing is really not built
appropriately for this climate. I mean,
it was built where you don't have a
consideration for the long-term
sustainability and resilience of that
housing. So, we find ourselves in a
situation where when people come in and
they're a homeowner to a new house, they
have to spend a lot of their resources
improving that existing house because
like Daniel said, we don't have that
much land to build in new places in the
Anchorage area. So, a lot of what we
have to do is fix the current housing
stock that we do have. So, an investment
in energy efficiency,
insulation, making sure you have an
appropriate heating system, making sure
that the windows and doors are are in
the right place is what we focus our
time and effort on to make sure that our
housing is appropriate.
>> Can we talk a little bit more about this
essentially supply side? like how many
like active developers are there in
terms of like companies that do housing
development and then the specific like
supply chain constraints that the
inherent nature of Alaska poses to
construction and repair.
>> Sure. So I'll take a shot at this. the
development community. It's a it's a
very dangerous thing for a person like
me that works in a US or a quasi
government agency to try and speculate
about the true population of developers
because there are all kinds of people
that I don't talk to that do very
important things in the state. We
operate about 10 different housing
programs that build or buy things that
people will live in that's consistent
with our mission across the state. We
have uh roughly 70 partners that we work
with across the state that are various
nonprofits. uh we'll have maybe 30 or 40
different developments going on at any
given time across the state. So I mean
is it 10? Is it 20? It depends on the
the year. And what are we talking about?
Are we talking about people that work
with government money like the
low-inccome housing tax credit program
or grants? Or are we talking about
individual homebuilders? Is it a person
who's building a multiplex downtown
that's going to be an 8 figureure
development or more? Or is it a person
who's building a duplex? So who's a
developer? It's sort of a loaded
question. And sort of like when people
ask us how much does it cost to develop
per door, when we're reporting what
we're doing on the public side with
building housing units, we're looking at
a complete budget. So when we say it
cost $350,000 a door to deliver new
housing to a community in the state,
we're talking about the cost of
acquisition, the cost of construction,
paying an architect, paying a developer
fee, all these other things. If you're
talking to a contractor who might also
consider themselves a developer, they
might just be reporting the vertical
construction costs and they're keeping
things off. So the language when we
define these terms really affects the
answer. So the developers that we work
with, I'd say about 10 to 20 work with
our agency to develop multifamily
housing through our grant programs.
There are a ton of people that build
housing all across the state that I
think would equally be called developers
by other people, including their banks
and their community partners. So it
really depends on who you talk to.
>> So just on this note, I take the point
about permitting and where you're
building in a place like Anchorage, but
talk a little bit more about what the
constraints actually are on new
construction. So there's the high cost
of materials. I imagine there's probably
labor and in many respects, you know, if
you're building residential in a place
like Anchorage, you might be competing
for contractors with, I don't know, an
oil and gas company that's probably
paying more money for them to build
something else. So what exactly are the
exact constraints you know whether it's
materials, construction, labor,
permitting, land availability, finance?
How would you describe those?
>> Sure. So there's uh you said to get
technical. So um Cobb Douglas, you
remember the production function from
economics class where like what you can
do is a function of labor and capital,
right?
>> There's also something that involves
technology that transforms that curve.
So there are labor inputs, there are
capital inputs in terms of money, but
it's also what you do with technology
and the system behind it. So your
question about development constraints,
it is part labor, it is part capital, it
is part logistics because these are huge
issues. But with the aging sort of group
of people that we have that are starting
to retire and the people that are spread
out all across the different far-flung
reaches of Alaska, the capacity is as
much of a constraint for a lot of these
folks. And this is something I think
Jimmy's team works with our partners a
lot on as well.
>> The capacity is as much of an issue to
some of them as funding
>> or construction materials because we can
put money out there. There can be
resources to build housing, but if no
one knows how to do anything with it,
that can stop a community from actually
developing housing. So that's one of the
things that we've been doing with some
of our development initiatives is not
just coming forward with some of the
needed things like money or some of the
other like federal resources but saying
hey we know some of the things that
maybe your community doesn't because in
addition to being spread out
community-wise our skill base as a state
is also spread out we have people all
over the state who understand things.
There are people who are great at
procurement that are located off the
road system that don't have running
water. There are people that understand
finance. You'll find Stanford grads in
some of these communities, but you need
to put together a team of people that
understand a lot of things to make
housing happen. So, when we see that
they have three of the five things that
they need to make a housing development
move forward, there may be the missing
two things that we have that we need to
bring into the community that's as much
a part of the development equation as
capital is. Yeah, Daniel, I I think that
speaks to Alaska Finance Corporation's
partnerships with a lot of entities in
the state. You know, I think of the
Alaska Association of the Housing
Authorities. It's a 14 member
organization of different regional
housing authorities in the state and you
know, how we're able to communicate with
them and bring additional resources to
bear so that we can be in this together,
right? Because like I said earlier, it's
there's no magic bullet. there's no
one-sizefits-all and and you know to be
effective you have to provide that
assistance as a a team member. I think
that's just like a really interesting
idea that like you know in a place like
New York City like of course any new
housing development is going to take
lots of people with lots of different
skills whether it's the person who knows
how to put in plumbing the electrical
knows how to deal with permitting and
you know I'm sure many of the big
developers in New York City are like
one-stop shops or maybe it's a twostop
shop or whatever and the idea that in
Alaska like all that knowledge is there
but it's just so spread out so you don't
have that sort of like knowledge density
or those network effects which we don't
really think of I think a lot when it
comes to housing but it's very intuitive
when you talk about it in this context
>> and and think about right back to the
population of the state we still have to
do all the same things
>> there's still all the same jobs there's
just over 700,000 people right but if
you're in a place like New York there's
millions of people to do the jobs right
so so there's much greater opportunity
here in the state for individuals to
step into a role and learn new things
But there's there's not as many of us to
do the things that need to get done.
>> That's I think one of our strengths
because there are a lot of things that
are challenging about building housing
in Alaska. But I'm trying not to make it
sound like it's all doom and gloom. We
have a lot of things that do go for us
well. I was just in a a fairly small
community. It's a a hub off the road
system. And the mayor was on a job site
with us and uh one of the carpenters
referred to her affectionately in a way
that probably HR wouldn't like, but
they're very jovial. And this uh this
elected leader runs a gift shop in town
and she's on a firstname basis with the
contractor. She punched the uh utilities
director in the arm when he got out of
the truck. I mean, they know each other.
When we go in with this sort of
connection, we're their neighbors and
these are people that live right next to
each other. They're willing to help each
other in a way that I don't know if
Mayor Adams has that relationship with
carpenters in New York City.
>> I'm sure he would say he has some
relationship with carpenters. What the
nature of it is, we don't exactly know.
But
>> oh, you've heard of our mayor. You've
heard
>> but but they care and they're they're a
lot more predisposed to work with each
other because they live in a way that's
probably difficult for people in major
cities with hundreds of thousands of
people to understand the relationships
between the elected leaders that we may
work with and the people on the ground
that are actually going to be able to do
the work. And that's what's made some of
the initiatives that we've been doing
recently actually work because these are
people that actually know their
neighbors and they they have a really
vested a joint vested interest as a
community in making something happen. So
that is one of the things that we have a
lot of challenges but that's one of our
I think greatest strengths when we go
into the communities is being able to
leverage those relationships
[Music]
just to hone in on this point. Can you
give us an example of, you know, a
project that you did in, I don't know,
like a Sitka or something like that
that, you know, where you were trying to
bring in the requisite skills or the
requisite construction workers and
expertise in order to get something off
the ground and like in excruciating
detail. Walk us through what that
process actually looks like. Okay. So,
there are a lot of places in Alaska
where uh housing is such a challenge
that local employers have resorted to
actually building housing for their
employees. State workers don't really
have that option because the state
doesn't have deep pockets like some of
the big health clients do to do all
these other things or like banks. So
what we started seeing was our executive
director Brian Butcher was reaching out
to some of the other commissioners in
the state and they had positions that
had been vacant for a long time and they
were in danger of losing the positions
because they had been vacant for so long
because there was nowhere for these
people to live.
>> Wow.
>> And so if you go out to any of these
communities, the person who takes care
of the runway in the winter, which is
your main source of transport for
logistics, might not be able to find
housing. Like this is a really this is a
life and death issue for some of these
communities. So, we're like, well, why
aren't we we have programs? Why aren't
these communities utilizing our programs
to develop housing? Well, we decided to
get a little bit more direct. We're
like, well, we're they're local
governments. We're a quasi state agency.
We can work with them on a
government-to-government basis and say,
what is it going to take to get housing
developed in your community because this
is like a critical issue for community
and we need to come together and figure
out a way to solve it. So, we developed
something that we came up with. We
called it the last frontier housing
initiative after our state's motto. And
we approached local governments with
about $5 million each, just a couple of
them, and said, uh, we want x number of
housing units to go up into your
communities, some professional workers,
some affordable housing. We tried to
make it big enough so that it would be a
big enough dollar amount that would be
attractive for the community and have
generate some interest. But that's what
we did. We didn't come and say it has to
be a two-bedroom, it has to be this, x,
y, or z. We allowed the ask to the
community to come from a place where we
could be responsive to what they wanted
to do. Some of them wanted to help out
municipal people. We didn't know what
kind of land they'd have, what kind of a
capacity they'd have. And all the
conversations with the five partners
that we approached were extremely
different. One community was down 20
people, and this is a small community,
so down 20 people for a municipal staff
is big. They didn't even have a city
attorney. They're like, "We basically
need you to do almost everything for us.
We'll be on a review committee for you,
but that's about all we can do." Another
community, they had land and they're
like, "Uh, yeah, we have a procurement
department. It's great. We have land. We
don't know how any of this stuff works
with your program." So, we flew down
there and we did, uh, training with them
and all this other stuff. Another
community, they didn't understand a lot
of it. We had to go up there and it was
like an episode of Shark Tank uh sitting
there for a couple of hours while
everyone from the community started
asking questions about the resource
because a lot of these people are sold a
bill of goods from folks that fly in and
offer probably well-intentioned help
saying, "Oh, Alaska, we we'll show you
the way. Let us lead you out of the
wilderness."
>> And to jump in there, that is what
Alaskans do not want to hear is somebody
from the lower 48 coming here telling us
what we need or how to do something.
>> We're from New York and we're here to
help.
>> Yeah. cuz that conversation does not go
over well. I mean, we're flying into a
community of maybe a thousand people and
a bunch of the community elders are at
the table. We're the guest in the
community. So, it's like here's our
resource. We want to help you. And
that's it's pretty much just letting the
conversation play out. So, the
approaches were very different based on
what the community wanted from us, but
the thing that underpinned all of it was
we were coming to them with a resource
and a promise of support that we would
stand behind. And everything else beyond
that was the community's decision as to
what they wanted to do. Did they want to
take a more active role? Did they not
want to? Like some of them were dealing
with city managers who are dealing with
sewer lines, things like this, any
number of issues. They don't know how to
negotiate with the contractor. They have
no idea if a contractor asking for this
payment request is reasonable based on
the facts and circumstances. So for some
of them we were just a lifeline saying
we have lots of developments and we any
given point in time we have hundreds of
millions of dollars in developments that
are going on across the state. So this
is second nature for us and we can
provide that technical expertise from a
place that they trust because they've
worked with us for a number of years.
This isn't the first conversation that
we've had with a lot of the communities.
They know that the agency that we
represent doesn't have a history of
burning them. So when they call and say
is this reasonable and we say well have
you thought about this? Have you thought
about this? have you thought about this?
They're having a conversation that
anyone else could have with them, but
they trust us to provide them the
truthful answer. And we were able to do
a lot with that one.
>> Since you mentioned the hundreds of
millions in development, let's actually
talk about the finance part of finance
and we're very interested in various
financing models for housing and are
there way given especially given where
interest rates are etc. and who bears
the burden. Why don't you talk to us
about like how you finance yourself,
whether you use the municipal bond
market and are you know creative ways of
financing the construction of housing in
Alaska that are not that maybe those of
us in the lower 48 don't uh appreciate.
>> So I'm not the CFO and our CFO hockey
player that he is would probably come
down here very aggressively if I tried
to explain what he did. Um we're a
self-supporting corporation. So we we
have a mortgage department that provides
mortgage financing. Our finance
department is active in the bond market
making sure that our uh programs have
capital. A lot of the programs that
Jimmy and I operate are funded from
AHFC's earnings. Uh we're under the
executive budget act. Uh so our budget
goes to Juno every year and it's
allocated and usually there's a
recommendation of what to do with the
earnings from the corporation for some
of our programs. So like uh our
department and the planning department
we manage roughly 20 programs and it's a
combination of state federal and
foundation grants and uh tax credits
from treasury and then Jimmy has other
funding sources from a bunch of
different places. So it's a
self-supporting corporation. Sometimes
there are foundations that come in and
match other things like that. There are
financial tools that we use in housing.
Some of them are more relevant than
others. When you're looking at
development that costs a I don't know
$500,000 to develop a unit off the road
system, going from a 6% interest rate
down to a five and 38 doesn't really
make that $500,000 a door something less
prohibitive. So what we tend to see in
terms of the things that are driving
housing in the mission spaces that Jimmy
and I I think work in a lot, it's not
usually the these things like people
throw out terms like mezzanine financing
or these other weird types of debt
products. Those don't usually move the
market for the multifamily stuff in the
space that I see at the corporation. But
there's an entire world of home
ownership and lending and the
relationships with the banks that we
don't really touch that I don't want to
speak to because that's probably really
out of our area of expertise.
>> Yeah, I I would say that's true.
>> Okay. Well, sort of a related question,
but I imagine no matter what's going on
with your finances, you are, you know,
limited in some way in what you can do
and you have housing needs in relatively
large urban centers within Alaska. So
whether it's Fairbanks or Anchorage or
whatever and then you have lots of
housing needs in lots of different rural
communities, how do you decide where you
need to intervene and how you actually
prioritize a project?
>> As Daniel mentioned, Lost Housing
Finance Corporation is a quasi state
governmental entity. So we take our
direction from the legislature and the
governor's office essentially, right? So
there's a lot of the the initiatives
that we work on are coming with that
direction and that intent.
For example, one of the areas that I
work on and we work on in on our team is
improving the housing stock in rural
communities through weatherization and
making sure that the individuals in
those communities again have housing
that is appropriate for their climate
because you know they
you know the people that have lived in
Alaska for long durations and over the
generations you know they've always had
this can do attitude and I'm going to
put some sweat equity into something
that is really shines through in their
lifestyle and their community. But often
times they, you know, they don't
necessarily have the resources to do
that. And and Daniel was talking about
the last frontier housing initiative
program. And I think that's a a
wonderful way to help the community is
providing those resources. So when we go
into a community with our weatherization
program, we're not just going in to do
one house. We're going to come in and
we're going to do the community because
we need to take advantage of economies
of scale. We need to make sure that if
we're going to put materials,
insulation,
windows and doors, things of this nature
on a barge to then ship them up to the
Norton Sound and maybe up a river to get
to the community so that we can do an
overall weatherization project in that
whole community and impact 70 80% of the
housing units there, you know. So I I
think having the ability to take
advantage economies of scale and then
work with the community to make that
housing more resilient is very
appropriate.
>> Yeah. So on the subject of prioritizing,
we're a stayweight agency. So it's kind
of like asking a parent to choose their
favorite child.
>> We try and make sure that our resources
are allocated in a way that responds to
the entire state in a way that's
relevant. So one of the things that we
do like I said we operate a lot of
programs over 20 in our department
alone. We get a lot of information from
the operations of these programs of uh
how much homeless housing interventions
cost, how much developments cost,
operating cost trends, things like this.
Then we also commission primary data on
the rental market and then we uh do a
quarterly survey of lenders to try and
understand what is the market doing on
its own that we don't need to do because
it's already taken care of it. So we try
and make sure that we're not being
redundant to what's already happening
and we're actually serving an unmet need
in our state with the housing resources.
So that's a big part of it. But then the
other thing and one of the things that
makes the last frontier housing
initiative work and some of our COVID
responses, we talk to our partners. We
have 70 different partners all across
the state and we engage with them on a
fairly regular basis and we just ask
questions like what's going on in your
community? I mean, technology has been
able to do a lot about expanding access
to programs and things like that, but
the old school way of actually
connecting and engaging with partners
face to face, going out to their
communities like what we've been doing
over the summer, that is really where we
learn a lot of what we need to do to
reposition our programs because
especially with our state programs,
these are on word documents that we can
change upstairs if Brian gives us the
go-ahad or tells us that we need to
change direction. A lot of our homeless
response initiatives from COVID were
developed based on feedback that we'd
heard from our homeless and supportive
housing partners over the last decade.
The last frontier housing initiative,
the same thing. When we're going through
revisions to some of our rating
programs, we actually call people and
say, "Well, how do you make a decision
on when it's time to renovate your
project?" Or when you're looking at a
development, what do you actually like
walk us through the process? We try and
understand things from them. So it's not
so much us making a decision from our
little fourstory building here in
Anchorage for the entire state. We
really do try and inform that based on
the data that we get from our programs
and the conversations from our community
partners.
>> Let me ask a related question. How do
you judge the success of one of your
programs? Because again I imagine in a
rural area like in Anchorage maybe you
could measure it in sort of you know
traditional ways. So, we built a bunch
of housing and then we saw a bunch of
people move in and we saw economic
growth increase by whatever basis point
or percent or whatever. But if you're
talking about a remote community where
you know maybe a large chunk of the
population is basically subsistence
living, how do you actually measure the
difference that your housing initiatives
have made for that particular community?
Quantitatively, it's very difficult to
come up with a benchmark that doesn't
basically redline communities
>> because if you look at it on a
quantitative standpoint and say it has
to be this growth rate or this unit
thing, you're going to disadvantage one
community or not. I'd say over the 17 so
years that I've been here, what I've
come to view success from in terms of
our initiatives is we do a lot of
benchmarking when we design these things
and whether or not the outcome delivered
more than I thought. That's usually what
I see a success. Was there something
that we didn't account for that we
captured in the process that drove the
outcome further than we thought it
would? The last frontier housing
initiative, we thought we were going to
get 53 units. We got over 60. So, our
leverage rates for the units were in
excess of what I did or what we were
modeling when we set that up. We were
able to get broad-based support that led
to other new programs. So, we got more
than we thought we were going to and
people seemed happy with it. that tends
to breed success that has support for
our programs going forward in the
future. So, I know it's a kind of a
fuzzy thing in a quantitative world, but
it's really more of a qualitative thing
that drives whether or not what we did
works, at least from my perspective.
>> And I'm going to take a little different
approach in thinking some of the the
space that my team and I operate in, and
that's focusing on the existing housing
stock. And we I talked a little bit
about the weatherization aspect. So what
we've done at Alaska Housing since the
early 90s is developed an energy
modeling software which is unique to the
state of Alaska. We call it awarm
AKwarm. And what this tool allows you to
do is assess the building's energy
efficiency level from a performance
standpoint. So, if we're going to go
into a community and weatherize it, like
I talked about earlier, you know, we do
an energy modeling of that home to
determine and benchmark its performance.
So, if we're going to then do insulation
and air sealing and some other aspects
to improve its resilience, we can then
measure that on the back end.
Thinking back to 2008 2009, the state of
Alaska made a very large investment in
weatherization and we had two big
programs. One was targeted more toward
the low-income residents and it was
weatherization services provided by many
of our partners throughout the state at
no cost to the participant and the other
one was a rebate of up to $10,000 for
homeowners making improvements to the
house. And what this allowed us to do
was create a database of more than a
100,000
housing units throughout the state.
Right. And there's what is it? Correct
me if I'm wrong, Daniel, but in the
neighborhood of like 260,000 occupied
housing units
somewhere in that neighborhood.
>> I try to never do math in public, but
that sounds right.
>> Yeah. And and at least owner occupied.
And you know, so you think about having
a database of over a 100,000 of these
buildings in in one centralized location
and you have information on how much
insulation's in there, the square
footage, the location, the building
performance. I mean, that's an
incredible wealth of information they
then can use to make decisions. One of
the things that we've heard is that
Alaska has particularly high quality
public data in part due to the um
dividend that people get from the
permanent income fund and the uh people
are willing to hand over some data in
order to get that check. So it sounds
like it sounds like you guys have it
pretty hand better than many in terms of
having sort of some visibility into your
own state. I want to ask about one of
the things in New York City is that you
know there's a fair amount of public
housing but there's a perception that
it's not kept up well, that it's in
disrepair, that elevators go unfixed,
etc. Public housing is under your
purview here at the uh housing finance
corporation. Talk about your what how
that works and also maybe maybe we could
use some lessons or what you've learned
about like how to keep the housing stock
there. Good.
>> Yeah. So, the public housing is a
different department than what Jimmy and
I manage.
>> Yeah. What I can say is that the units
that we operate that HFC owns are do
tend to be kept up better um than a lot
of the other folks. So the stories that
you may have heard or read about in
other cities. I think our units tend to
be kept up very well. Uh it's one of the
benefits of uh being the type of agency
that we are. If there's an issue with
one of the units, it's very easy to get
through to someone at HFC to connect
with it. And I don't know the
relationship that other housing
authorities have in other states. I'm
guessing they have a different reporting
structure than what we have here at HFC
where Brian has a very close
relationship with the folks in the
elected government and all these other
things. So it's um they tend to look
nice relative to the other ones. This we
read the same stories that uh you do
about other places like that wouldn't
happen here. But maintenance is an issue
in Alaska.
>> Sorry, did you want to say something?
>> Yeah. So, uh, in the room here, we also
have, uh, Stacy Barnes, director of
government relations and public affairs
here at the Housing Finance Corporation.
Come in, come into the conversation.
>> Well, thank you. So, you've had some
really great dialogue and a couple of
things that I was thinking about as you
were talking about it is as it relates
to public housing and the work that we
do statewide. You know, we're one of 39
of the original moving to work agencies,
which is a designation
>> moving to work.
>> Moving to work. It was a designation
that was authorized by Congress for us.
um when Senator Stevens was still in the
US Senate and that gave us great
flexibility to accommodate many of the
needs that we see across the state. So,
as a result of this designation, we've
been able to provide a lot of
flexibility and meet the needs of
Alaskans where they're at. So, we have
public housing in 16 communities across
the state. We own and manage more than
2,000 properties oursel and we also work
really closely with landlords across the
state. And on the question of funding,
of course, there's never enough HUD
funding to meet all of the needs in New
York or elsewhere. Our state augments
the funding that comes in because of the
success that our mortgage and our
finance business have. And as a result,
we pay a dividend to the state of
Alaska. Jimmy mentioned being under the
executive budget act. That means that we
get authority to spend some of the
dividend toward our public housing
maintenance and that has been really
successful in helping us to maintain the
units. All right. So, as we're wrapping
up this conversation, I guess one thing
I would be really interested in hearing
from you is what do you think is like
the big takeaway from the Alaska
experience that could pertain to the
lower 48? What should people know about
the housing market here and your housing
initiatives that could possibly have
some insights for, you know, housing
bottlenecks elsewhere in America? I
thought a little bit about this question
as we've been talking over the last hour
or so and I take a lot of what Daniel
talked about with regard to how we are
working with our partners in specific
communities and meeting the needs of
those community members where they're
at. You cannot have one big magic
policy to fit every situation throughout
the state. And I honestly think that
other places throughout the country can
take that to heart that you have to
recognize that giving the power to the
people to make the decisions and giving
them the resources to determine the path
forward for their situations is a best
approach and a best practice that we've
taken here in Alaska. And I think that's
something that others can take away from
this conversation. Yeah, I guess um from
the lessons I think I've learned from
our implementation of some of the co
initiatives and what we did with the
last turntier housing initiative and say
that there's a change in terms of how we
do work as housing professionals that
feels like it's it's happening at
different speeds all across the country.
Through the pandemic, we were able to
develop systems that really connected us
to our partners and we used a shared
space and through the last frontier
housing initiative, we're connecting
partners to our institutional
infrastructure here at Alaska Housing
and people are able to in other
communities do things that used to take
self-contained agencies with the staff
and a finance department and all these
other things because they're able to
connect with our resources. So they're
able to do more in a sort of cohesive
community framework now than they could
a couple of years ago. When you think
about uh vacation rentals, we talked
about that earlier. People have owned
houses for a long time that they could
have rented out. But now with platforms
online, they can connect to some
corporate infrastructure and someone
traveling here from Japan can find their
house in the Kai Peninsula and rent it
for the weekend that they're in Alaska.
So the people on the Kan Peninsula that
are doing that are able to leverage some
corporate infrastructure that exists
somewhere else to have market
opportunities for them in their
community. These sorts of connections
can apply to some of the housing
programs and we're starting to see that
happen where we're connecting
communities that are off the road system
with communities that are on the road
system within our state. So Alaskans in
Juno are helping Alaskans in Gnome
operate some of our programs. And these
barriers that have historically been
there through technology for any number
of reasons are starting to come down.
And technology is really helping us
expand access to some of our programs to
people in communities that may not have
had all of the necessary tools to
utilize them in the way. And that's a
really exciting thing. It's bringing a
lot of people together and doing more
for our state than we could have a
decade ago. And I'd just probably close
by saying that, you know, our bonds are
rated double A plus and higher on Wall
Street. We had more than $600 million in
single family mortgage activity last
year and the delinquency rate on our
loans is less than one-third of 1%. We
are doing exceptionally well there. So
you heard Daniel and Jimmy talk a lot
about partnership, but we heard Mary
Daly talk a lot about resilience as
well. And the people of Alaska are very
resilient and we're very optimistic as
well as we work together in the smallest
and most remote communities to attempt
to tackle these many challenges. I think
for me listening to you it's like one of
these things is by necessity
you have to have a lot of collaboration
which is a word everyone uses all the
time but you're literally you know so
many different sort of entities and
vehicles under one roof and that seems
like a sort of necessity but it also
seems like the type of structure that
you know in other states or like New
York City where a lot of authority is
extremely bulcanized or other fights
about who has authority like maybe merge
some departments and actually put them
under one roof could be a pretty useful
takeaway. Anyway, Jimmy, Daniel, and
Stacy, I'm glad uh glad you uh also
joined us. Uh thank you so much for
coming on. That was really fascinating
and uh really educated.
>> Thanks for allowing me to pop in.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Happy to be here. Thanks so
much.
[Music]
Tracy, I love that conversation. I love
the detail. I love, you know, in our
conversation, we talked with Mary Daly
and she talked about Alaska's economies
and listening to housing is like very
clear what that means, that this is just
a very diverse state in terms of the
challenges and the the nature of living
arrangements.
>> You definitely get a sense of it from
that conversation. The other thing I was
thinking about was in terms of like the
usefulness of this type of program, I
can imagine having dealt with a bunch of
contractors that just being able to call
someone up, a government agency or quasi
agency and ask like, I just got a quote
for the following activity, does this
sound reasonable to you as someone who
has, you know, been involved in many,
many of these projects. That would be a
huge helping point just when you're
getting started. I think another
takeaway for me from this conversation
and others is that like infrastructure
bottlenecks or choke points in the lower
48, everyone started paying attention to
them in the second half of 2020 and that
they feel like endemic to the nature of
living in Alaska. The idea that if the
person who clears the runway can't find
a house right then that that is an open
position and then that is the threatens
the lifeline of an entire community.
that is not like a 2022 story. That's a
story that's like endemic to how Alaska
operates. And so it feels like all these
things that we've just sort of like
woken up to are like the core like
challenges of,
>> you know, operating the economy here.
>> Alaska is truly an Odd Thoughts themed
state.
>> Yeah, it really is.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Check out the Alaska
Housing Finance Corporation. Maybe some
lessons to be learned in your state.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot
and Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have the daily newsletter and
all of our episodes. You can chat about
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when we travel to uh Alaska to learn
more about its various economies, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]